# Why Via?

The original explanation for this autopilot's existence has been written about before, so if you want the full story with chronology intact, then consider checking out [this](https://www.copperpunk.com/post/0-in-the-beginning-there-was-the-middle) blog. Fortunately we still believe there are reasons to continue with its development. First, let us pay our respects where they are due. The ArduPilot and PX4 projects have been (and continue to be) the gold standard for open source autopilots. But even they have their shortcomings, which is why we set out to build an autonomous vehicle control system in the first place. Rather than focus on them, let us highlight some of the features that will set Via apart from any other autopilot on the consumer market.

## The Nerves Platform
Nerves allows us to run embedded Elixir on affordable hardware, such as the Raspberry Pi 4. By using a well-known third-party platform for development, we can push the custom hardware design much further down the road. Plus this allows developers to get their hands on representative hardware long before a "final" version ever exists.

## Decentralized Redundancy
A single board running Via can control an entire vehicle, and this is the default case. However, if we put multiple boards on a vehicle and connect them over a wired network, all boards (Nodes) can work together by means of a decentralized cluster. This reduces the impact of any single hardware or software failure. For example, an aircraft might use one Node for each side of the vehicle. In the event that one Node fails, the other might still have sufficient control authority to land the aircraft safely. For larger vehicles, one might place a Node at every actuator. Each Node is running the same exact code, so the amount of software to develop and maintain is not affected by the amount of hardware. There is no "voting" system placed between the Nodes. We assume that if a Node is alive, it is healthy and its commands are valid (see [this](https://www.copperpunk.com/post/2-code-for-any-mode) post for more).

## Third-Party Control
The decentralized nature of this architecture allows for another differentiating feature: high-level commands can come from anywhere, even a third-party device. Consider the use of a "smart" camera on-board a fixed-wing UAV as part of a search-and-rescue operation. The UAV is covering a designated section of land while the camera captures ground imagery. Rather than having a person looking at the camera feed for what could likely be hours (and require a high-rate data stream), the camera could be analyzing the data and searching for anything that looks like a human. If the camera spots something of interest, it can tell the UAV to circle at a particular location, meanwhile alerting the operator on the ground that something has been spotted. The operator could then examine either a live video feed, or still images of the object. If this is not what they are looking for, the operator could instruct the UAV to continue on its path.<br><br>
While this might be a capability that is already built into some military-grade autopilots, there is one significant distinction: None of the image analysis logic is in the Via code. The camera interacts with Via by means of a very simple API, allowing it to suggest new navigation commands (go to here, orbit here, etc.). The Via source code does not have to change every time the camera software is upgraded. This eliminates the risk that new device support might jeopardize the health of the code base, while greatly expanding the potential capability of the vehicle.

## Modular Algorithms
Remember the promise of modular laptops and cellphones? The thought of being able to swap parts as they become damaged or obsolete is extremely desirable when it comes to hardware, and we believe that software should be no different. We have designed Via to leverage the brilliant community of developers who are interested in autonomous systems. Modularity is at the heart of this architecture. Two aspects of Via that are immediately available for improvement are the Estimation and Control algorithms. We are experts in neither, and so our current solution has relatively basic forms of each. Fortunately we have separated those parts into libraries that expose APIs, allowing Via to use different sources for these algorithms as they become available. In essence, the Estimation and Control modules rely on third-party software  It just so happens that currently this software was also written by us.

The modular nature of our code also allows for many different types of vehicles to be supported without the need for multiple projects. Fixed-wing aircraft, multirotors, and ground vehicles have all been proven to work with Via. Improvements that are made using one type of vehicle can often lead to benefits for the overall code base. There is room for everyone in the Via ecosystem. 